***  [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VbIGfKPVcXc][Early Life Experience and Sexuality]]

- speaker :: Robert Sapolsky
- title :: Early life experience and sexuality
- group :: Mind.Blown
- part-of :: Human Sexual Behavior II

**** Transcript

first off focusing on early environment
environmental factors having something
to do with adult sexual behavior what we
can translate that into is ways in which
early environment affects every single
one of these subsequent ones
what does early environment childhood
have to do with shaping of sexual
behavior a theme that's also going to
come out in every topic we're going to
hear of after this buzz words that
should beginning to be keeping you awake
at night modulatory contingent if-then
all that stuff here is another one

here's another concept that comes
through the evidence shows that there is
very little about early life experience
which influences the quality the way in
which an organism goes about having sex
what's another way of stating it this is
a pretty set in stone bunch of fixed
action patterns early experience is not
about learning how to be sexual early
experience is about learning the
appropriate social contexts for being so
and that is shown in species after
species that is what experience is about
not how to do it but when to do it and
who you should not in your right mind
try to do something preceptive too and
things of that sort this is what early

experience is about and what we're going
to see in a week is the exact same
boring paragraph early experience does
not teach organisms how to be aggressive
it teaches organisms the appropriate
context for being aggressive so what's
the sort of evidence for this for these
early effects one example a whole
literature that emerged that is covered
somewhat in the zebra book in another
domain but this whole literature that
emerged in the 1950s work looking at
captive primates what are the
consequences of growing up in a certain
degree of social isolation what happens
to behavior and eventually people

studying behavior and physiology what
happens to behavior in adulthood if you
are a young rhesus monkey who grows up
only with peers and no mother
or grows up only with a mother and no
peers or grows up with mother being
present only intermittently or at the
most extremes growing up with neither
mother nor peers or any other member of
your species around you will see in the
book a whole discussion of the ethics of
these studies but what does your early
social environment have to do with
things like sexual behavior and what you
see coming out the end is when you
looked at these adult primates since

replicated over and over they go about
the sexual behavior of the plain old way
that everybody else does but they do it
in totally socially inappropriate
context and thus you have these males
who were raised in some degree of
isolation early on growing up and
carrying out perfectly normal sexual
fixed action patterns on the towel in
the room on the bowl of food on the who
knows what wrong context you have trying
to do things with animals you should not
go anywhere near in terms of social
dominance and such in appropriate
context early experience shaping not how
but when what the if-then clauses are

more issues of early experience shaping
adult sexual behavior arousal
proceptivity etc we already heard one
example of this with humans that's the
whole kibbutz literature that was that
whole business that if you spend lots of
intimate time with somebody before age
six what you will do is in some
subliminal imprinting way decide forever
after this individual does not feel like
a potential mate this individual feels
like a sibling that was the example in
the recognizing relative lecture of
showing that hooray we are such a
cognitively sophisticated species we can
figure out who's somebody's fourth
cousin three steps removed is by

thinking and that's how we make our
mating decisions showing instead in
those studies there is this non
conscious level one of the rules that
humans have is lots of exposure
intimately to somebody early on in life
and you are not going to be very likely
to get that preceptive behavior stuff
going on later part of
turning them into a pseudo can because
of that early exposure one additional

domain I will touch on here in terms of
experience which is what does early
experience have to do with sexual
orientation and depending on which
decade you were asking this question the
answer would range from everything to
virtually nothing going back to the
virtually everything time which was
dominating sort of the first half of the
20th century how people thought about
the subject what you had were two broad

models for what sort of early
environments increased the likelihood of
boys becoming gay as adults and these
were the two models the first one was
the absence of a father figure model and
this was one straight out of monkeys
learning who they should try to pelvic
thrust with or some such thing this was
the argument that what do father figures
provide appropriate training for
appropriate context for preceptive
sexual behavior growing up absent a
father father figure increasing the
likelihood of being gay the other model
was having this totally pain-in-the-neck
neurotic screwed up mother who has
basically said between the lines makes

you crazy when you grow up and thus you
have circa 1950 psychiatrically
certifiable disorder of having a
different sexual orientation
obviously we're I'm going to head right
now is there has not been a slightest
shred of evidence over the years either
for the missing father figure model of
sexual orientation or the neurotic
mothering style model complete nonsense
